OAuth scopes blog (#3709)
FusionAuth/fusionauth-site: astro/src/content/blog/how-to-design-oauth-scopes.mdx

By the end of this post, you'll know what scopes are, how and why you'd use them, and how to design them to ensure adoption and maintainability.

{/* more */}

Third-party applications where scopes make sense include:

* those offering custom functionality, like an analytics engine built on top of your fintech APIs
* AI and LLM tools using the model context protocol to interact with APIs
* apps providing a different interface to improve the user experience

We'll talk more about the scenarios where scopes make sense. But first, let's talk about what scopes are.

## What Are Scopes

Scopes are fundamentally a way to give users more control over the data applications can access by creating groups of permissions that the user can allow or deny to an application.

Normally, the types of data accessed by an application talking to a service or API are determined by the developer of each of these. Scopes introduce a step for the end user to allow or deny data access by an application. Because scopes are used by an application to request permissions, they are only applicable when:

> * the API or service holds data about the end user, such as bank data or offers functionality related to the user, such as sending an email on their behalf

Reviewer: I was think about actions like `creditScore.calculate`, but I guess that is info about the user. So what you have does make sense, but I think you should work your reply into the piece. 

 If the data is not about the user, there's no sense in using scopes since the most important part of scopes is that they give the user a chance to offer or revoke consent.

> * the API or service holds data about the end user, such as bank data or offers functionality related to the user, such as sending an email on their behalf

Author: Great, makes more sense to me. I updated.

Since a bank has a different set of permissions than an email service, scopes are specific to the business offering the data or functionality. The organization running the platform holding the data and the server the user logs in to, the Authorization Server to use the jargon of the OAuth spec, defines the meaning of each scope. Scopes are not further defined in the OAuth specification, though there are standard scopes defined in some other standards ([such as OIDC](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#ScopeClaims)).

The meaning of a scope is tied to its implementation. When you are building a system which uses scopes, you need to design them to meet your needs. This post will help you do that.

### The OAuth Flow With Scopes

Here's a sequence diagram illustrating the Authorization Code grant for a scoped access token, and subsequent API requests.

<OAuthScopesDiagram alt="An example request flow with OAuth scopes." />

It's similar to a standard [Authorization Code grant](/articles/oauth/complete-list-oauth-grants) with the following additions:

* a `scope` parameter is included in the authorization URL kicking off the login

> * there's a consent screen displayed to the user 

Reviewer: my be helpful to see a screenshot of a consent page.  People have seen it, but may not be able to picture it.

> * a `scope` claim is included in the access token

Reviewer: Suggestion:
maybe define a claim - *A claim is just a piece of information about the user.

* the API validation must check the `scope` claim

## What Do the Standards Say

> Let's look at the RFCs which define OAuth scopes. Before we do that, here's a primer to help translate RFC jargon into terms a developer might use:

Reviewer: I think it may help to move these definitions above the diagram. You could also use this to define the claim. Then in the diagram you could also list the object with these terms.

Logged In User/Browser (Resource Owner) / Client App (Client) / FusionAuth (Authorization server) / APIs (resource server)

Author: Thanks. I moved it, but I don't want to use the terms of the standards anywhere other than in that section.

* A token: a string or value which proves the holder has access 
* Grant: a standardized flow a user or other entity can follow; when successful, the entity ends up with a token
* Resource owner: the end user, usually a person
* Client: an application which needs access to data or functionality; it is seeking a token
* Authorization server: where the user logs in; responsible for minting tokens which prove the client is authorized
* Resource server: the API or service; accepts tokens and returns data or functionality

Now that that translation is done, let's see what standards have to say about scopes.

> Scopes are [defined in the OAuth 2 RFC (6759)](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-3.3). Here's most of the RFC section (I removed the string defining how the scope strings are constructed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scopes are [defined in the OAuth 2 RFC (6759)](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-3.3). Here's most of the RFC section (I edited it a bit to make it easier to read).
```

* scope values are strings
* the scope URL parameter contains scope values separated by spaces; there's no internal structure
* scopes are defined by the authorization server
* scopes are requested by a client, but they can be denied by
  * the authorization server based on its policies 
  * decisions of the resource owner
* scopes are associated with an access token issued by the authorization server 
* the resource server is responsible for enforcing limitations due to scopes

Per the standards, all the actors in an OAuth grant affect scopes:

* the client asks for the scopes it needs
* the authorization server defines the scopes and may have a policy for what scopes are allowed
* the resource owner can instruct the authorization server to ignore a scope request
* the resource server enforces the limitations of scopes

Great, enough with the RFC jargon. No more authorization servers or resource owners for the rest of this post. Promise!

> Scopes relate to permissions, but so to other common authorization concepts like roles. Let's look at how scopes are different from roles.

Reviewer: "but so to other common" seems a bit of did you mean something like

```suggestion
Scopes not only relate to permissions, but to other common authorization concepts like roles as well. Let's look at how scopes are different from roles.
```

If these are not true, it's better to [stick with roles or another form of authorization](/articles/identity-basics/authorization-models).

## Designing Scopes

To design scopes for your application, you should:

* Talk to external developers about what they want to build on top of your platform. This allows you to check that your API groupings make sense.
* Catalog the APIs you want to expose to third-party developers. A smaller set is better to start with, but ensure enough functionality to entice third-party developers to use the APIs.
* Group functionality. Talk to internal developers about this as they'll have a sense in how the APIs are used.
* Discuss the implications with your security team, especially if these APIs have not been publicly available before.
* Check with external developers to make sure your API groupings make sense.

You also need to decide what the actual scope values are. These are the strings which developers will add to the authorization URL to request the permissions from the end user. Consider multiple priorities which will be in tension, including:

* end user comprehensibility

> * short, understandable names

Reviewer: Is it worth mentioning the size limit a user can run into if there are too many scopes or the names are too long? Maybe as an Aside?

Author: there are no limits on scopes in particular. Only limits enforced on URLs or JWTs by the transport mechanisms that apply to them whether scopes are used or not.

* `accounts.read`: Basic account information and balances
* `profile.read`: User profile and contact information
* `transactions.read`: Transaction history and details
* `transfers.write`: Initiate money transfers between accounts
* `payments.write`: Make bill payments
* `investments.read`: Investment portfolio information
* `investments.write`: Execute investment trades
* `creditScore.read`: Access credit score information

Each of these permission groupings are clear in intent, make sense to the end user, and are something Changebank can expose to a set of developers. 

Because scopes require user consent, making sure users understand what they represent is critical. If a user can't understand the third-party access they are allowing based on the scope name and any additional information on the consent screen, then you have a problem and need to reconsider your scopes.

Also, keep  in mind that there are two parties that are involved in picking scopes:

* the third-party developer needs to know which scopes their application needs to provide its functionality
* the user needs to know whether or not the application should be allowed to access the data represented by the scopes

> This means that you don't want your scopes to be too granular, otherwise you'll run into fatigue from both of these sets of users.

Reviewer: This is a great point. May make sense to put as a warning or special call out.

#### Hierarchy

Since scopes are strings and authorization logic takes place in your APIs and services, you can build in hierarchy. With the Changebank example above, you could add the following scopes that make the `account:read` scope more granular:

* `account.profile.read`: read the user profile information
* `account.list.read`: list accounts
* `account.detail.read`: read account details

Avoid nesting the hierarchy too deep, such as `account.profile.names.firstname.read`. I only saw two levels of hierarchy when looking at scopes in the wild. This makes sense because hierarchy can impact scope usage:

* the user might be unsure what the differences is between each of these and why they should grant one and not the other
* the third-party developer might not know which scopes they should request and so will request overbroad permissions
* the API or service offering the data will have increased implementation complexity because the APIs validating the access token and scopes contained in it need to have the mapping of which scopes apply to them

A one to many mapping between scopes and API endpoints is relatively easy to reason about, but hierarchies can be more complex.

> 

Reviewer: It may be worth mentioning here that some Authorization servers like FusionAuth allow you to add a description for the scope that would help with the confusion.![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c2df3ba5-1daf-4da2-a81b-b7e150806027)

#### Versioning

> There are two approaches to versioning: 

Reviewer: sounds like 3 approaches with the third being don't bother.

This is another reason to start with a small set of scopes, because if you have designed the scopes incorrectly, you'll have fewer to revise and fewer developers will be impacted.

#### Scope Deprecation

Consider future deprecation when designing your scopes. Things to consider:

* how long will you support a scope that is no longer useful
* what kind of migration support will you provide to developers who use a deprecated scope
* how will you communicate deprecations to your third-party developers

Like many decisions, the precise plan for scope deprecation depends on the size of your platform ecosystem, the length of time the scope has been available, and the severity of possible changes.

You'll need to be more communicative if you are removing a scope entirely than if you are changing functionality accessed when using it. You'll need a different communication strategy if you can call the five developers who have built on your platform than if you have thousands of developers who've been using a scope for years. In the latter case, it may be impossible to remove the scope!

> ## Setting Up A Developer Program

Reviewer: I think you can remove this section. Doesn't fit with the topic in my opinion.

Author: Interesting. I thought it aligned with the documentation section. 

Maybe I can shorten it to something like: If you aren't going to enable developers to understand your APIs and get access to them, don't bother building scopes into your APIs. or add something to the documentation section.

Will play around with it.

Some services have many scopes, with a few having close to twenty. Others, such as the BigQuery Reservation API, have two: a read scope and a write scope.

### Slack

Slack has over [100 scopes](https://api.slack.com/scopes) and uses both `.` and `:` characters to separate scope segments. Slack also distinguishes between scopes that can be used by various types of software such as bots.

You can also see how they deprecate a scope like `conversations:history`. Interestingly, they announced this deprecation in 2021 but still have not removed the documentation, pointing to the difficulty of removing a scope once it is released.

### Zendesk

Zendesk has CRUD oriented scopes, with a focus on resources, such as tickets, users, and organizations. Scopes consist of a resource and/or an operation. Operations can be appended to a resource or standalone, in which case they apply for all resources available to that user.

The Zendesk API also returns an access token even if a requested scope is invalid; they validate the token on the API request and will respond with an error message during that request.

> Zendesk also manages to overload the term "scopes" in their API, with OAuth `scope` as one thing and OAuth `scopes` as a different concept, to allow for programmatic access.

Reviewer: This is a little confusing to me. While interesting, I can't wrap my head around what different definitions of scope and scopes would be. I would either remove this or link to more information.
